line and
we were chipping concrete,
firing on bunkers,
concrete pail boxes and all that kind of stuff. And
it's a damned expensive way to demolish the
enemy's fortresses.
Okay,
so
you went from Normandy to Leipzig. You met the
Russian forces, and then you went south in Germany
to where? To
Pilsen, near Pilsen, to west of Pilsen, and not too
far northeast from Nuremberg.
Then we went from there, pushed up from there up to,
through the so-called redoubt mountainous
country, up to Pilsen. And
when we got to Pilsen,
was already whipped, withdrawing. Their units
were dissolving and
the natives were leaving Pilsen in our direction
rather than toward the enemy or toward the other
way. streaming along the highway out with the guns
in position, pointed at Pilsen and so forth. So I
got in an airplane and made a little
reconnaissance over the area, called in and we
also picked up some good maps of Pilsen, city maps.
They had one of them laid out in a fire control
center and called in the native and says, can you
show us here on this map where the best brewery is?
Make the best brewery. He put his finger on the
spot. So we put a pin in the map and got the
coordinates. And my last command to the artillery
was to draw a thousand meter no fire circle around
these coordinates.
They are the brewery and we expect to be there
tomorrow. That was my time. You had priorities.
Huh? You had priorities. Damn
right. During the Battle of the Bush
Come look over my shoulder a moment.
This thing was compiled by the decor operations in
the ETO, 6 January 1942, 9 May 1945. So this gives
the dates and places of... Where your unit was at
all times. Not only where my unit was, but this is
the core, the zone of action. The whole core. Now
here, from here down to there was the battle to
expand and establish the lodgement area. this
thing back to the beach. Now this is for one corps.
Another corps or two landed over here, and the
British were off up here. So we were the contact
corps with the British all the way along here, and
now where this narrows down, that's the
breakthrough. As a matter of fact, General,
the general that was killed, what was his name?
Scotch name.
Gee, I'm terrible on names today, isn't that
awful?
In the big bombing raid on the breakthrough out of
the lodgement area,
This guy was superintendent of the command staff
school while I was out. I was a student there.
It begins with this. Well, anyway, he was killed
there and there's a lot of damn stories about it.
The battle for the breakout narrowed down here and
so The hottest fighting was for this little
corridor in here. About twenty miles south of
Normandy? Well, south of St. Lowe. St. Lowe was the
shoulder that was hard to get past. Got down to
here, and the fighting from here down was the
German. We had made the breakthrough here for
Patton. A lot of people think Patton made the
breakthrough. Hell, he didn't pull the trigger at
the breakthrough. It sure is interesting though
that you spent basically two months just trying to
make the breakthrough, getting off out of the
Normandy area, and then from August 2nd, down to
September, just about one month, September 11th,
you were already on the German border over there.
Well, a lot of things happened there. Patton
didn't come into the lodgement area, into the
combat zone. He was still back here until about D
plus
When was, oh about July the 20th, somewhere around
there. I think it was about the time that the
attempt was made on Hitler's
life, and we had that strange broadcast by Lord Ha
Ha that followed that event. It was just about that
time, I'd say about July the 20th. Now, he came in
somewhere around that time, about July the 10th,
11th, 12th maybe. Now he took command there of the
buildup that had been made behind the troops
holding the lodgement area. Then the troops
holding the lodgement area reinforced by recent
arrivals, made the big effort and made the
breakthrough here. And you see there's the
headquarters of the 5th Corps right there. It
moved from down here on the beach where I talked to
Ford, it slipped over to some better quarters near
Port d'Ambassade and then followed the progress
of the Corps on down to the breakthrough down here
and this breakthrough was a terrific battle.
There could be no mistake about it because the
Germans were dug in up to the hilt and it was a rugged
battle from this narrow spot here down to here. Now
down here at this stage of the game The German 7th
Army,
the 7th Army commander was in command of all the
troops in France
between, I think his responsibility was about
here, and down to this line here. Northern France.
North, northwestern France. He had the
northwestern quarter of France. His zone went way
down here below the Brest Peninsula.
I think his command post was some, you can't read
the names of the towns on this map, but it's about
probably along there. What about him though?
Well, the commander of the 7th Army
was scattered down here,
and at the time of our attack, he was having a
staff study. Where's Rems? Rems was long about
there. Wouldn't that be it?
down along about there, along this axis into
Marist.
But that's where he was, and then what happened?
Well, he was down there having a
tactical study. R-E-N-N-E-S? Renz. Yeah, well
that's it. He was down at Renz. with his Corps
commanders and his...
and this is before D-Day. He has them down there in a
conference at the time of D-Day. Well now the
commander of the Corps that had the front for
Normandy, all the way from pretty close to the
British zone at Foutaques, right across northern
France, was a crippled man and an old
artilleryman, but still on active duty and pretty
sharp.
He knew that the staff this conference at Renz was
to discuss the vulnerable points on his front.
And this thing was going to be a sort of a command
post exercise about what would you do
if the attack were right now. That's what the Army
commander is asking. Now his front, he's got this
entire northeastern corner of France, including
the Brest Peninsula, are under his command. So
here he is with his staff, his corps commanders,
talking about the nitty-gritty. How's the
situation in your area? How's the situation in
your area? and so forth. And so this damn almost
retired general, he was actually crippled from
wounds received here, there, yonder, maybe World
War I. He knew that this was going to be the
discussion So, he says, well, hell, I'm gonna wait
and do something before they ask the vital
question. So, what he did is he pinched out, he
pulled his,
he pulled his most ready division out of their
billets and put him up and told him that his
presumption was that his weakest point on the
coast was between Grand Comte and
Port-en-Bassin. That included, that was
Normandy Beach, including the cliff that
my friend from the nearby town, the former
president of the college. Rudder. Rudder. He was
to capture that cliff in our plan. Well, he knew, he
knew that his weakest point was from Grand Camp
over to some point over here west of over to the area
that was on the English front. And so he alerted
the—I think I can give you the number of his
division.
He alerted them. What did you think of when you got
into Germany? What did you think about the German
people?
Was there a lot of hatred? Not particularly. As a
matter of fact,
there's an interesting map here and I'll show you
if I can find it. I haven't looked at this in years.
And it was getting down to our sea here. We're in
Germany now. Yeah, we're in Germany. So you're
running out of targets. We're running out of
targets. And when the road was clear for our heavy
artillery to move forward,
They
got to a place called Leipzig. Mm-hmm. Leipzig was
about to come under our guns. Mm-hmm. Now in
Eastern Germany. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And the...
We had quit there were any targets that appeared on
the front was being ably handled by the light
artillery and
we were nursing our ammunition and following
closely behind them and I think it was in, we were in
Gittington, the university town, the night that
Roosevelt was died, and
that created a big commotion among the
Well, the messenger came back and says it was, to
me, I was to go to Corps Headquarters, which was in
advance of my own headquarters, and
be at a forenoon staff meeting. And headquarters
was in a place called Nomberg. and
the officer that brought the orders back
said I was to be at the Corps staff meeting at
Namburg at 8 o'clock or 9 o'clock Something like
that. And that,
well it didn't say what for, but it says for. What
was it for? Well it was to tell me that
they were going to move into Leipzig. Take a look at
this map here.
Here's the corps headquarters at Nomberg and here
is the close support battalion of the 102nd
Cavalry. That's the regiment that was on their
flank all the time.
And here's the Soviet Army. Here's the Soviet
Army. And so you were not more than it looks like a
mile away from them. Well back here at this
university town,
that's where they caught me. And the fellow that
brought the orders back was the civilian control
officer. They called him G5. He was in charge of
relations with the French or whoever the
civilians were. In the area. Yeah. And he was a
lawyer, still practicing law in Memphis. he
came back and says you're to be at this meeting and
says I'm supposed to brief you with certain
material here and he says it's highly secret
yakety yak and but
we're going to capture Leipzig And as you'll find
in this material, Leipzig is in territory that
belongs to the Russians. And he says the big
problem is what do you do when you capture a city of
790,000 or close to a million. I think that is about
that figure. He says it's one thing to liberate. He
says we've been liberating cities in France, but
ever since then we've been capturing them. He says
now this is the biggest capture that's gonna be
made in Europe. And he says it's got the old man all
worked up about it. What's he gonna do about it? And
he says the tentative plan you'll detect in these
sheets of super secret stuff and he says you read
them tonight and tomorrow have them in your pocket
and give them back to me when you attend this staff
meeting. Well, he still didn't tell me what I was
getting into because that was the general's job.
But what it amounted to is that
here on this flank was an armored division and on
that flank was the sixty 4th Infantry Division,
something like that, some high number, kind of
Johnny-come-latelys. And they were on this plank
and the 2nd Division, which was one of the landing
divisions,
was up here. Now these two infantry divisions were
about to put the clamp on this city of Leipzig. So
the old man was worried about what he was, how he was
going to come out on it. So his solution was to use
the personnel and equipment of artillery that was
back behind him and create a task force to move into
the city to grab it ahead of both the American
troops and the
German troops grab it, take it and hold it until the
military government people had time to send teams
up to do the usual job. They never dreamed they'd
capture anything as big as this and they had no
teams set up to do it. So they said, we'll create a
task force to go in there and grab this area and
police it. They'll have bulldozers enough to get
the rubble out of the streets and to knock over any
petty barriers. And he says, Where do we get the
task force? He says, well, I'll take two or three or
four or six artillery battalion regiments. He
says, like the 190th and so on and so forth. And he
says, we'll create a task force hill. You see, he's
put that label in the city. And he says, task force
hill will be reinforced by anything that he wants
that isn't already lying in the presence of the
existing enemy and looking through sights at him.
He says, the city is blossoming with white flags.
It's a surrender job. But how do we get it? Because
between the time One army pulls out and the other
bar moves in. There's a completely lawless
condition and the civilians kill one another if
they've got a bitter enemy that day and there's no
authority, no nothing. So he wanted the old
general solution was right on the heels of the
second division. and on the heels of the 64th
Division, right on their heels, would be
truck-borne personnel and equipment and men to
move in and grab the city hall, grab every place,
the police station, grab everything, invite the
surrender all the anti-aircraft, my God, the
anti-aircraft defenses around this town looked
like a hedgehog pointing up. They'd shot up most of
their ammunition though, offered no resistance
to us. And it says, these following Task
Force Hill will engulf the city. and grab
everything before there's a reaction. So that's
what you did? That's what I did. You moved down and
took it. Now were the people, how did the people
react to you? I know they wanted to surrender, but I
mean was there any resistance, any sniping? Some
sniping, very little. Were they fearful of the
Russians? You're damn right they were. They
wanted you to take the city before the Russians? to
surrender. Now you can see there was already— The
Russians are right there, it looks like, a couple
of miles away. Well, on their front at the time I
moved in, there was still one battalion, one
regiment, another battalion, another
battalion.
There were remnants
of those battalions and two divisions up here in
the north. Those two divisions were gonna be
contained by the second division as it moved up hot
on their heels. So these two divisions could be
written off the books as a threat to a fight for the
city. So we were to go in and act as a,
act as a team. And they asked me what did I want and so
forth. I hadn't time enough to think the thing
through between the time that I was briefed by this
Memphis lawyer.
So I had time to think it through and I decided to
take not only my own three battalions, I had three
battalions, organic then, but I decided to ask for
the...
I saw no reason why I should go in there with one
regiment. and I could just as easily have three
regiments. So I said, well, so I had my mind made up.
He says, well, what do you think? I said, well, I
think the 190th could do a pretty good job by
themselves, but I don't know why we should be up
there clearing the muck out of their damn streets
with these other two regiments sitting back here
on their fanny. And I says, I'd like to have the
166th,
and I says, I'd like to have one battalion of
engineers complete with equipment for clearing
the streets and meeting the disasters here. What
was the condition of the city? Well, it was shot to
hell pretty bad. And I told him everything I
wanted. I wanted a battalion of engineers and
another battalion, I wanted a field battalion, a
medical corps, and there's another battalion. So
what I carried, that's Force Hill, let's see.
might be listed in
this. I don't know. Did you and your men actually
bump into the Russians then? Yeah, there were a few
Russians. For always, you run into a Russian,
the minute that the enemy fades from the When these
German divisions, when they found themselves
with their back to the river and the Russians on the
other side of the river, they began turning in
their weapons. And so stragglers from those
people over there naturally began showing up and
we immediately grabbed them and put them in a
stockade.
We took over the police force in Leipzig, and of
course we captured the chief of police, locked him
up, put him and his top people in due rest vial, and
told the rest of the police, somebody's got to keep
some law and order around here, and if We're going
to expect your help and your full cooperation and
you're going to help us mop up your city and help you
save as much of it as we can. Now I talked to junior
captains. I talked to the chief of police, but I was
too, we had already made the decision that anybody
with a command authority that fell into our hands
was not only relieved of his command authority,
but was a prisoner of war, period. And went right
back to the prisoner of war center.
What did you think of the Russians when you met
them? Well, I met them in another place. I met them
down in Czechoslovakia
and I got on very cordial relations with a
lieutenant general commanding the, oddly
enough, the 5th Corps Guards. I don't know what the
guards were. I guess it was normal Russian
division. But that's another story. Let's say
I've already talked you down for quite a bit.
Maybe we better knock off
at one o'clock. The guys I saw were under very
favorable circumstances.
And our first trouble with them, we met them in
Czechoslovakia, not at Pilsen, per se, because
we, in a rural sort of way, continued to do the same
thing in Czechoslovakia that we had done in
in Leipzig, and that is make friendship with the
civilian authorities, get their police force out
of jail or wherever they were, activate them,
extract
from them top key men in the city government. Now,
we were always, and this was a handicap, we were
under. These ignorant bastards back in places
like Paris thought that they knew everything and
they'd write directives to do this and do that. But
when you're on the ground and you're trying to
achieve an objective... It's a lot different. You
better accept the cooperation of anybody that
volunteers his cooperation. the fact that the guy
comes in hat in hand and says it's all over. Now,
we
disarmed all the top policemen in Lapsing and If a
guy was wearing a weapon bigger than a club, or more
dangerous than a club, what the hell are you doing
with that? They took it away from him. On the spot,
the first American that saw him
said, I want the weapon. And the guy would
sometimes say, for a souvenir. says yes, and hand
it to me right now, and then pull out the gun and lay
it on him. You can't, in dealing with an armed man,
and you're armed, you can't fool with him. Now, you
remained on active duty until February 1946, and
at February 1946 you were separated. You were a
colonel at this time, is that right? Yeah. And you
were, had you given any thought at all to remaining
in the service and making a career out of it, or did
you want to go back and be a college president
again? I thought of that a lot.
The, uh,
in the first place. Here, have this. Well, say,
that's yours. No, no, no. I'm not going to drink it.
You go ahead
and drink. This helps my memory on everything
except names. Names are terrible. So you had
thought about staying in the service? I never
intended to stay in the service a day in my life. Oh,
okay. So you did not think then, let's get this
straight, you did not think? I did not play with the
idea at all. You wanted to go back and be a college
student?
plus the freedom and the enjoyment. Okay, so you
left the service. Now, the other question I wanted
to ask you was when were you promoted to general?
Well... To brigadier general. You were promoted
to major general in the early 1950s. Well, in the
same manner that I never was a first lieutenant.
Oh, in 1946, you were promoted to Major General of
the 32nd Division of the Wisconsin National
Guard. Yeah. Okay. So you never were promoted to a
one-star general. No. You just skipped that.
Yeah, just in a cavalier manner. And the governor
then promoted you to the Major General. No. The
governor had nothing. Okay, who did? The...
There's an awful lot of
mixed up imagination in people's minds about the,
the
governor cannot, a governor can appoint any golf
of friend he wants to a colonel. And he can promote
him to brigadier general or whatever, whatever he
wants to. But he's not a federally recognized
officer, see? So a promotion without federal
recognition. I was promoted from second
lieutenant to captain because It was to the best
interest of the National Guard of Wisconsin, the
federally recognized National Guard. Every unit
was federally recognized and every man in it was
subject to the active duty militia. That's what
the National Guard is. Someday when you got
nothing else to do, you can read the sorriest book
and the hardest book I ever wrote, and it's the,
I
think the official title is, we had a hell of a big
argument over the title. You always have an
argument with the publisher
I wrote this
book lying around here somewhere.
The Texas Navy? Sea Dogs of the Sixties? No, I guess
that—by the way, my departure
from Lou's in 1967—pretty good story. You were
appointed a two-star general. What were your
functions? What were you in charge of? I was in
charge of all of the planning of the training of the
division. It's barracks status and it's home
station status.
collectively. And at camp, of course, we had field
training there. And I was in command then. And I'm
telling you, we could do just about as much.
The only thing that the biggest handicap of the
Guard, say, is the Guard a 100% ready
organization.
When it comes to knowledge and know-how, they are
as 100% ready as anybody in the regulars. And most
of them have at least, are at least graduates of
their arms college. Fort Sill, all that stuff,
see.
they have their big handicap is that the
personnel, officers and men, are not in a physical
condition to go into the field and go into a real
hard fight.
Now, the beauty about the training that we had
in which the entire training of the regiment was in
my hands. There was nobody looking over my
shoulder telling me what to do.